# First Order (Star Wars)

TheFirst Orderis a fictionalmilitarymovement andrump statein theStar Warsfranchise, introduced in the 2015 filmThe Force Awakens. It is formed following the fall of theGalactic Empireafter the events ofReturn of the Jedi(1983). Secretly guided by the resurrectedSithLordPalpatine, the First Order aims to destroy theNew Republicand rule thegalaxyas anautocraticmilitary dictatorship.

The First Order is the main antagonistic faction of thesequel trilogy, oppressing the pro-democracyResistance(akin to theoriginal trilogy'sRebel Alliance). It is led bypuppet rulerSupreme Leader Snokeuntil his overthrow byKylo Ren, who assumes command until Palpatine's return. The organization also appears in variousrelated media.

According toStar Wars: The Force Awakens: The Visual Dictionary(2015), and the trilogy novel seriesStar Wars: AftermathbyChuck Wendig, after the Galactic Empire was defeated atBattle of Endorin 4 ABY inReturn of the Jedi, thousands of worlds rose up to join theRebel Alliance, and destroy the disorganized Empire, which had fallen victim towarlordism. The Alliance formally reorganized itself as theNew Republic, and retook the Core Worlds, including the galactic capital,Coruscant. One year after Endor, the remaining Imperial fleet made one final, massive attempt at a counter-offensive which came to a climax at the planetJakku, the biggest battle in the war since Endor. The Imperial counter-offensive was decisively defeated. The remaining Imperial forces were pushed back to a handful of sectors on the fringe of the Outer Rim, containing only a small fraction of the galaxy's population and industrial base. These sectors were a heavily fortified final redoubt, and the New Republic deemed that they posed too small a threat to justify the high cost in life that liberating them would require. The New Republic forced the Empire to accept the Galactic Concordance, a humiliating armistice agreement which imposed strict disarmament plans and punishing reparations on the remaining Imperials.TheAftermathtrilogy establishes Imperial Admiral Rae Sloane, introduced as a captain inJohn Jackson Miller's 2014 novelA New Dawn,and Commandant Brendol Hux as the de factofoundersof the First Order. Sloane, after achieving the rank ofGrand Admiral, coined the term "First Order" as she establishes the reborn empire that will eventually take that name.She is additionally inferred as a future mentor figure forGeneral Hux, who appears as a child inEmpire's End.

Over time, fugitives of the Old Empire reorganized themselves, becoming a firmly entrenched and isolationisthermit kingdom, which spent the next three decades instigating what would become a "cold war" against the New Republic, gradually rebuilding its military strength and secretly re-arming in violation of its armistice agreements. The First Order secretly was aggressively pushing into the Unknown Regions (the unexplored swaths of territory in the galactic west) to seize new undeveloped worlds in order to supplement their resource base, as well as build new shipyards and industrial infrastructure far from the eyes of the New Republic.

The 2016 novelStar Wars: Bloodlineexplained how this faction officially reorganized into the "First Order", and that this final transition only occurred about six years beforeThe Force Awakens. By that time, the New Republic Senate had become divided into two parties: the Populists led byLeia Organa, who wanted to decentralize authority, and the Centrists, who wanted power to remain concentrated in a strong central government. Many of the Centrists were former Imperials who admired the old Empire for bringing order to the galaxy, and who feared that without strong central control the New Republic would become as weak and ineffectual as the Old Republic. Ultimately, many Centrist worlds seceded from the New Republic to reunite with the holdout Imperial remnants on the fringe of the galaxy, and formally combined into a new government called "the First Order". First Order conspirators publicly revealed that Leia was in fact the daughter ofDarth Vader, severely harming her political standing among the remaining Populists.

The vast majority of the New Republic's worlds remained intact, but with the exodus of the Centrists its Senate became dominated by the remaining Populists, who favored decentralization and demilitarization, not confrontation. Even after these events, most in the remaining Senate were happy to see the Centrists go, feeling that the new First Order still controlled far too few sectors of the galaxy to ever pose a serious threat to galactic peace. In their view, it was easier to just let the Centrist worlds peacefully leave of their own volition and rejoin the Imperial worlds rather than fight a war to keep them by force.

The new "First Order" came to be ruled by the mysterious Force-wielder known asSupreme Leader Snoke, who was secretly created by the resurrectedEmperor Palpatineto control the First Order after purging its previous leadership.Through Snoke, Palpatine seduced Leia's own sonBen Soloto the dark side of the Force, who renamed himself "Kylo Ren".On his turn to the dark side, Ben/Kylo slaughtered most of his uncleLuke Skywalker's other Jedi apprentices (with the rest joining him) and destroyed his new academy. Blaming himself, Luke fled into self-imposed exile to search for the ancient first Jedi Temple. Kylo Ren, meanwhile, took on a position as Snoke's right hand within the First Order's military.

With her political standing severely weakened, and the New Republic Senate gridlocked and unwilling to recognize the First Order's military build-up, Leia Organa decided to withdraw and form her own small private army, known as the Resistance, to fight the First Order within its own borders. She was joined by other members of the formerRebel Alliancesuch asAdmiral Ackbar. Publicly the New Republic continued to disavow direct association with the Resistance to maintainplausible deniability, and though the majority of the Senate did not want to intervene against the First Order, several Senators privately channeled funds and resources to the Resistance. This state of affairs continued on for the next six years until the events ofThe Force Awakens.Comic book writerCharles Soule, creator of the 2015Marvel ComicsseriesStar Wars: Poe Dameron, explained that immediately prior to the events ofThe Force Awakens, "The New Republic and the First Order are in a position of détente, and while there have been a few small skirmishes between the Resistance and the First Order, it's very much a sort ofcold war."

The First Order's handful of sectors simply do not possess the galaxy-wide resources the old Empire used to be able to draw upon, and in addition the armistice treaties with the New Republic put strict limitations on how many ships it could physically build. Therefore, unlike the old Galactic Empire'sswarm tactics, the First Order's military has had to adapt to a more "quality over quantity" philosophy, making efficient use of what few resources it has. Culturally, the Galactic Empire'sSith-influenced philosophies have been incorporated and streamlined. Its military is built upon "survival of the fittest"; if one soldier cannot fulfil their duty and dies serving the First Order, then so be it. The Order can only become stronger by culling the weak from their ranks.

A major plot point inThe Last Jediis that the First Order has developed new "hyperspace tracking" technology, allowing them to continue to chase enemy vessels through hyperspace from one jump to the next (until one or the other runs out of fuel). This technology was first mentioned in passing inRogue Oneas another research project the Empire was starting to develop almost forty years before. However, it appears that such technology existed at the time ofA New Hope, as Darth Vader was able to track theTantive IVfromScarifto Tatooine even through hyperspace.

The First Order lacked the resources to build and crew thousands of Star Destroyers. While its fleet is a fraction of the size of the Imperial fleet at its height, on a one-for-one basis its new ships are much more powerful. In addition, they boast thirty years' worth of advances in military technologies compared to the old Empire. As a result, the First Order now deploys starships such as the newResurgent-class Star Destroyer, nearly twice as large as the oldImperial-class Star Destroyer which it replaced as the mainstay of the First Order fleet. With anaval doctrinethat accepted the renewed importance ofstarfighterswithin their overall strategy, theResurgent-class adopted the carrier-centric designs of theGalactic Republic'sVenator-class Star Destroyer.

The First Order's TIE fighters, designated TIE/fo, are more advanced than the old Empire's TIE/ln model, and show greater concern for unit stamina and survivability. The First Order's Special Forces use a more heavily armed two-man TIE/sf variant. Visually, their color scheme is reversed from the old Imperial design: the Empire's TIE fighters have black solar panels on a light grey metal body frame, while the First Order TIE fighters have white solar panels on a dark metal frame.

The Last Jedialso introduces a new starfighter element to the First Order fleet, the TIE silencer superiority fighter. Much as TIE interceptors were the next generation fighter starting to phase out the original Imperial TIE fighters, TIE silencers are heavily inspired by the Empire's TIE Defender and assigned only to the most elite units. Visually they somewhat resemble a cross between a TIE interceptor and Darth Vader's TIE Advanced x1 prototype, being wider and more elongated, while boasting heavier weapons and shields to be able to faceX-wingshead-on. Their technical designation is "TIE/vn" (because in earlier drafts, the ship was called "TIE vendetta"). Kylo Ren pilots his own personal TIE silencer inThe Last Jedi, which he uses to assault the Resistance ship, the MC85 Star CruiserRaddus.

InThe Rise of Skywalker, another new TIE is introduced, the TIE whisper. This model comes in two variants, with either solar collectors resembling those of a TIE interceptor or those of a TIE fighter. The latter model is introduced during Poe Dameron's mission to the Sinta Glacier Colony, while Kylo Ren uses former as his personal craft inThe Rise of Skywalker, using two ships in his pursuit of both Palpatine andRey; both ships used are destroyed by Rey.

OtherStar Warsmedia depicts more TIE variants in use by the First Order.Star Wars Resistanceintroduces a TIE interceptor variant designated TIE/ba, known as the TIE Baron. The series also introduces a TIE bomber variant designated TIE/se. The older TIE/sa bomber previously used by the Galactic Empire also saw service and was designated the First Order bomber. Other variants include the TIE/es assault shuttle, and a variant of the TIE/rb "Brute" heavy starfighter used previously by the Empire.

For space to surface delivery, the First Order is also seen deploying several standard troop transports. Elite units and high value command personnel such as Kylo Ren use theUpsilon-class command shuttle, a stylistic evolution of the old ImperialLambda-class T-4a shuttle (but without the third fin on top, and now sporting large wings that retract upon themselves on landing).

The Last Jediintroduces several more ships of the First Order.Mandator IV-class Siege Dreadnoughts are larger but rarer thanResurgent-class Star Destroyers, used as orbital bombardment platforms which can functionally wipe out entire planets' population centers (albeit through conventional weapons, just short of being considered superweapons). Dwarfing even these other vessels are Supreme Leader Snoke's personal flagship and mobile capital, theMega-class Star DreadnoughtSupremacy: a wing-shaped vessel wider than it is long, the size of a small country. TheSupremacymeasures 60 kilometers at its greatest width—equal to about 18Resurgent-class Star Destroyers lined up end to end.

The First Order employs a quality-over-quantity philosophy with its soldiers and personnel. Unable to conscript quadrillions of soldiers to fill its stormtrooper ranks yet unwilling to invest huge resources in breeding a rapidly produced clone army, First Order stormtroopers are kidnapped from their home worlds and trained from birth, raised their entire lives for no other purpose. First Order soldiers and crews have constantly trained for combat inwar gamesand simulations, making them much more effective one-on-one than the endless waves of stormtrooper conscripts fielded by the old Empire. First Order stormtroopers are regularly put through mental indoctrination and propaganda programs, to make sure that they remain fanatically loyal and never hesitate or question orders. Soldiers are not even given individual names for themselves but merely serial numbers, such as "FN-2187".

First Order stormtroopers are formally deployed in squads of ten, with the tenth spot reserved for a heavy weapons specialist as the needs of the mission require: usually a heavy gunner, but sometimes also flamethrower troops, or riot troops equipped with energy batons (which are incidentally capable of blocking a lightsaber).The design of the armor of regular and heavy gunner stormtroopers bears significant resemblances to the design used by the Galactic Empire, such as the helmet visor, nasal filters, and overall shape. However, the filter was extended, among other practical features. According to First Order officerCaptain Phasma, not even aWookieecould crush said armor. Some stormtroopers held high ranks—a significant improvement from the one-rank system of the Empire. These were indicated by the color ofshoulder pauldrons: white for squad leaders, black for sergeants, and red for officers. In the rare instance of a stormtrooper earning the rank of captain, they often earned a blaster proof cape. Occasionally, they modify their outfit even further—Captain Phasma made blaster proof chrome copies of all her equipment and greatly improved vision modes of her helmet's visor. Captain Cardinal, the bodyguard of a First Order founding father, received almost all-red armor from his superior as a sign of trust. Introduced inThe Rise of Skywalker, a new variant of troopers was introduced in the form of jet troopers, equipped with G125 projectile launchers and jet packs.

The First Order also fields its own evolution of the old AT-series of armored transports, the AT-M6, used as a heavy siege weapon. Dwarfing the older AT-AT, the AT-M6 has numerous design improvements including heavy serrated cable-cutters mounted on its legs—to avoid being tripped up again like AT-ATs were at the Battle of Hoth. These cutters are positioned in such a way that the AT-M6 walks on its "knuckles" instead of the pads of its feet, which—combined with a heavy siege cannon which gives it a hunched-over appearance—gives the AT-M6 an almost gorilla-like profile compared to the more elephant-like AT-AT.