# Sith

TheSithare an order ofForce-sensitive beings and the mainantagonistsin thefictional universeof theStar Warsfranchise.They are the ideologicalantithesisand ancient enemies of theJedi. TheSith Orderis depicted as an ancientcultof warriors who wield thedark sideof the Force to seize power by any means necessary, includingterrorismandmass murderwith the ultimate goal of destroying the Jedi order and rulingthe galaxy.

Several antagonistic factions in the franchise, including the Confederacy of Independent Systems, theGalactic Empire, the Imperial Remnant, and theFirst Order, are shown to have originated from the Sith.

Sith, known asSith Lords, are by nature ruthless. Members of the order have the power to assume absolute authority amongst their kind and be granted the honorificDark Lordof the Sith. Sith culture is based on perpetual treachery and betrayal. The fate of Sith Lords is to be killed and replaced by their own apprentices. The Sith teach their apprentices to revere the dark side of the Force, to give full rein to aggressive emotions of rage and hatred, and to believe that others are expendable in the pursuit of power, thus making the Lords' demise inevitable.

Like the Jedi, the Sith wield thelightsaberas their traditional weapon, a device that generates a blade-likeplasmapowered by akyber crystal. In contrast to the Jedi, who use blue, green, purple, white, and yellow lightsabers, the color for a Sith Lord lightsaber is usually red, born of an unnatural corruption of thekyber crystalthrough the dark side's malignancy, causing it to "bleed," which affects the sound of ignition with a harsher hiss.

One thousand years before theGalactic Civil War, the Sith came close to extinction after the Battle of Ruusan. Despite this, they continued to covertly exist as two Dark Lords at a time, a master and an apprentice, until their later resurgence in the history of the galaxy.

George Lucashas acknowledged that many sources have inspired the concepts of theJedi, Sith, and theForce. These includeknighthood,chivalry,paladinism,samuraibushido,Shaolin Monastery,feudalism,Hinduism,qigong,Greek philosophyandmythology,Roman historyandmythology,Sufism,Confucianism,Shintō,BuddhismandTaoism, and numerous cinematic precursors. The works of philosopherFriedrich Nietzscheand mythologistJoseph Campbell, especially his bookThe Hero with a Thousand Faces(1949), directly influenced Lucas and was what drove him to create the 'modern myth' ofStar Wars.In particular, the Manichaean relationship between the dark side-using Sith and light side-using Jedi mirrors several modern and classical literary tropes.

The ongoing struggle of thehumanistic"light side"-affiliated Jedi to permanently defeat theegoistic"dark side"-affiliated Sith is framed not only as a contest of values but as a deep metaphysical conflict: the dark side of the Force is viewed by the Jedi, and generally represented withinStar Warsmedia, as not only a dangerous expedient but as a form of existential corruption that must be purged for the universe, or a person, to attain spiritual balance.Jedi are often depicted as imperfect individuals, but their cause of selfless heroism is ultimately on the right side of an inexorable cosmic struggle against evil, embodied in the power-hungry Sith and the dark side of the Force.

The dualistic relationship between these Sith and Jedi concepts of "purity" mirrors the philosophical and literary concept of "Apollonian and Dionysian": the Jedi are portrayed as embracingpurity, reason, temperance, altruism, and otherhumanistic virtues. The Sith, by contrast, embrace curiosity, emotion, conflict, power, instincts, unfettered self-interest and otherhedonistic vices. However, whereas the classic Greek concept did not necessarily view the Apollonian and Dionysian principles as opposed,Star Warsframes the Jedi and Sith as opponents in a dire moral struggle, with the Sith cast as corrupted villains apparently destined for defeat or self-destruction in the end.The Greek analogy also makes clear that the conflict between the Jedi and the Sith reflects the universe's eternal dichotomy between order (Apollonian) and chaos (Dionysian). Ironically, the Sith, and the Imperials generally, believe in an extreme social conservatism for sentient beings at large, enforcing order on society through brutal authoritarianism. However, the individual Sith soul is chaotic: a Sith is never at peace, wracked by jealousy and paranoia until he or she has achieved ultimate supremacy.

Within theStar Warsnarrative, the Jedi and Sith naturally have differing understandings of the Force. In Sith rhetoric, the relationship between the philosophy of Jedi versus Sith closely mirrors German philosopherFriedrich Nietzsche's concept ofmaster–slave morality; Sith value "master" virtues, such as pride and power, whereas the Jedi value altruistic "slave" virtues like kindness and compassion.

The goal of the Sith is tangible greatness: the ability to shape or destroy a world according to one's will alone. The goal of the Jedi is moral goodness: freedom from inner turmoil and selfish desires. However, the Sith consider the Jedi's aspirations to be either hopeless or pathetic. To the Sith, achieving greater power, following one's passion, and freedom from inhibition are more authentic ways of expressing the Force. While the Jedi strive for a harmonious connection to the Force, the Sith seek a deeper understanding through conflict, as they believe the Force is defined by it.

Originally, George Lucas conceived the Sith as an army of fanatical soldiers that served theEmperorin the same way that theSchutzstaffelhad servedAdolf Hitler. In developing the history forThe Empire Strikes Back, Lucas condensed this into one character in the form of Darth Vader.

Sith philosophy values conflict as acatalystfor growth and as a means topurgingthe weak, disloyal, and undisciplined. Sith emphasize the maxims "because we feel like it" and "survival of the fittest" and viewrestraintas a weakness. Members of the order can be regarded as adhering to the Nietzscheanmaster moralityand are characterized by the desire to seize power by any means necessary, leveraging force (both physical and supernatural), social maneuvering, and political cunning to their advantage.

ThroughoutStar Warsmedia and in popular culture, the Sith are infamous as the dualistic antagonists to theJedi, an affiliation ofaltruisticwarriors who strive to use their own martial training and connection to the "light side" of the Force to promote peace and the common welfare throughout the galaxy. To counteract the Jedi's benevolent influence, the Sith instigate both large- and small-scale conflicts as part of their larger plan to destabilize the Republic and eventually take control of the galaxy.

The Sith are dedicated to the "Code of the Sith" and to mastering the dark side of the Force.The Code of the Sith identifies conflict as the fundamental dynamic of reality, and holds that the search for lasting peace, within or without, is both quixotic and misguided. Rather, Sith embrace strife anddark passionas salutary and emancipatory forces, as they believe that violent struggle purges the decadent and weak, and that emotions such as aggression and hate provide the strength and resolve to secure freedom through victory.

Peace is a lie. There is only passion.Through passion I gain strength.Through strength I gain power.Through power I gain victory.Through victory my chains are broken.The Force shall free me.

Although Sith seek dominion, Sith philosophy stresses that power belongs only to those with the strength, cunning, and ruthlessness to maintain it, and thus "betrayal" among the Sith is not a vice but an endorsednorm. Accordingly, the Sith reject altruism, self-denial, and kindness, as they regard such attitudes as founded on delusions that fetter one's perceptions and power. In connection with their philosophy, the Sith draw on the dark side of the Force through severe negative emotions, a technique opposed to that of their archenemies, the Jedi, who rely on the Force's "light side," i.e., the Force as experienced through disciplined states of apathy. Notably, both the Jedi and Sith shun romantic and familial love, as well as other positive emotions; the Jedi fear that such love will lead to attachment, and thus selfishness, while the Sith fear it will compromise their ruthlessness and connection to the dark side of the Force.

Although the Sith are intimately linked to the dark side, not every user of the dark side is a Sith, nor is every user of the light side a Jedi.

Yes, a Jedi's strength flows from the Force. But beware of the dark side. Anger, fear, aggression; the dark side of the Force are they. Easily they flow, quick to join you in a fight. If once you start down the dark path, forever will it dominate your destiny, consume you it will, as it didObi-Wan's apprentice.

The dark side of the Force is stigmatized as seductive, corruptive, and addictive by the Jedi, who view it as evil,whereas the Sith consider the dark side of the Force to be its most powerful manifestation, and regard theabstemiousJedi as blinded by false virtue. As portrayed in allStar Wars-related media, the dark side provides users with powers similar to those of the light side-using Jedi, but as it leverages passion and violence, its use is enhanced by negative raw and aggressive emotions and instinctual feelings such as anger, greed, hatred, and rage. By deciding to learn the ways of the dark side of the Force, the Sith may also acquire powers and abilities considered by some in theStar Warsuniverse to be unnatural. A notable example is "Force lightning", electricity projected from the fingertips as a means of attack and torture, most famously used by Darth Sidious to torture Luke Skywalker inStar Wars Episode VI: Return of the Jedi. InStar Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith, meanwhile, Palpatine claims that the dark side gave the Sith LordDarth Plagueispower over death itself. Being uninhibited in their use of the Force, Sith could also repurpose abilities shared with the Jedi, such astelekinesis, to new and terrifying effect:Darth Vaderwas infamous for his use of telekineticstrangulation, or "Force choke," as a means of execution or intimidation. He even went so far as to murder individuals with his power, including at least two Imperial officers and his wife,Padmé Amidala(though it is unclear if Padmé's death was caused directly by the choke).

"Fear is the path to the dark side. Fear leads to anger, anger leads to hate, hate leads to suffering."